 <h1>How does the duration of bureaucratic procedures 
affect the efficiency of government spending?</h1>

<P align="justify"><b>In Georgia, one has to complete two bureaucratic procedures and spend only two days registering a purchased property. While in Ukraine, the same deal takes seven procedures and sixteen days. According to Global Competitiveness Index, on a scale from one to seven, the government spending efficiency score in Georgia is 3,4 units, while in Ukraine it is 2,4 units. Is unhurried bureaucracy a barrier to distributing taxpayers’ money in a better way? Slow decision-making and permanent delays in the state projects' implementation are fairly blamed for being a reason for wasting the state budget. However, we found (or, rather confirmed) that corruption is what really matters for the efficiency of government spending.</b></p>

<P align="justify">In 2020, the average amount of government expenditures across the world exceeded one-third of the level of GDP. This is the highest value for all of the 30 years of observations collected by the World Bank. Larger government expenditures imply higher tax pressure on the citizens and business. 
That is why we are concerned that governments across the world spend taxpayers' money in the best way.
In our research, we investigated the impact of bureaucracy on the efficiency of government spending. In particular, the time one has to spend dealing with bureaucracy and the number of procedures one has to complete to obtain a benefit from the government formed the scope of our research. Let us highlight some of the channels through which the time the public sector bureaucracy takes may influence the allocation of budget resources.</p>

<h4>How may the bureaucracy affect the efficiency of government spending?</h4>

<P align="justify">There are three major channels for excessive proceduralism to result in inefficient use of public funds. First, simple time costs. Long and complex processes in the organizations in charge of publicly financed projects lead to delays in the realization timeline and hence to the escalation of the project’s costs due to inflation or exchange rate risks. Hence, important infrastructure, security, health, or education services that may improve peoples’ well-being takes longer and costlier to deliver. Particularly, among the reasons for more than 20 years lasted (and unfinished yet) construction of the radioactive wastes storages complex “Vector” in the city of Chornobyl in Ukraine was difficult and long procedures of the project documentation approval and violation of approval terms by empowered authorities<a href="#section1">[1]</a>. The delays counted towards the project’s costs rising through inflation, an increase in materials prices, and salaries.</p>

<P align="justify">Second, an excessive amount of bureaucracy one needs to deal with to obtain assistance from the government may discourage the target group from applying for the benefits. As Moynihan et al. (2015) explain people tend to overestimate “administrative burden costs” experienced at present and discount the benefits they would obtain in the future. It is particularly acute in the case of means-tested welfare programs, as the target categories include persons already facing some financial and/or health problems, for example, senior citizens. These conditions make it more challenging to cope with bureaucratic procedures. Hence, the target receivers are under-covered and corresponding policy goals are not achieved.</p> 

<P align="justify">Finally, longer bureaucratic procedures reduce competition. A good example here is public procurement. If receiving a license or permit from the government is complicated and takes a long time, bureaucratic requirements may serve as entry barriers for companies. In this case, fewer applicants may be able to collect the required documents to participate in government tenders.</p>  

<P align="justify">And of course, either of the abovementioned cases can be magnified by corruption. In the latter example of public procurement, when procedures are tedious and slow there is a higher chance that some companies which otherwise have fewer chances to win a tender will be tempted to bribe the bureaucrats to gain a non-competitive advantage in collecting all the necessary documents in time to participate in the tender. While the companies that were “put on hold” and as a result did not manage to complete all procedures will be excluded from the competition for the government order. Rose-Ackerman (1997) stressed the fact that the companies actually might be able to pay the bribe at a cost of the quality of the goods they would produce.</p> 

<P align="justify">In contrast, too fast and/or too easy access to public finances can also lead to inefficiency. For example, subsidies from the government may be assigned to citizens or businesses that actually do not need the aid. Another example comes from the analysis of the complex “Vector” construction costs. In particular, under not careful enough examination of the initial project documentation, the latter missed important technical characteristics that future radioactive waste storage had to meet. When it was found, the government had to order new project documentation. This led to additional costs, while the money spent on previous project documentation could be considered lost.</p> 

<h4>How do we measure bureaucracy and the efficiency of government spending?</h4> 

<P align="justify">As a measure of the efficiency of government spending, we used the “Efficiency of government spending” score from the Global Competitiveness Index. The score ranges from one (worst) to seven (best) and reflects the average estimate of the efficiency of government spending given by the executives, entrepreneurs, economists, and journalists when they were asked, “In your country, how efficiently does the government spend public revenue?” The main caveat of this data is that it is a subjective perception of the efficiency of public spending. Each respondent may have a different understanding of it.</p> 

<P align="justify">Two indicators from the Doing Business Index capture the time the bureaucracy consumes. The first indicator shows the number of days, and the second one shows the number of procedures needed to register a property. The data represents a standardized case of an entrepreneur who wants to purchase land and a building that is already registered and free of a title dispute. We assume that this case averages the bureaucratic system in each country. To rephrase it, if it takes a long to register a property, then, on average, the bureaucracy works slowly there. We also suggest that the number of procedures for registering a property captures the number of checks the bureaucrats on average have to do before deciding on the government finances allocation. While the number of days for registering property just captures the speed the bureaucratic machine works with.</p>

<P align="justify">While conducting our analysis, we also accounted for other country-specific factors that might affect the efficiency of government spending. Among them are corruption, quality of the government, per capita income, income growth rate, level of unemployment, shares of government debt and budget balance to GDP, indicators of budget transparency and democracy.</p>

<h4>Results and conclusion</h4>

<P align="justify">In contrast to our assumptions, we found that each additional bureaucratic procedure, on average, is associated with an increase in public spending efficiency. However, in line with our hypothesis, each additional day spent on bureaucracy decreases efficiency. Albeit, the results of our analysis suggest that to get a notable gain in the efficiency of government spending, we need either to introduce on average ten more bureaucratic checks or cut the time spent on dealing with bureaucracy by at least one hundred days. This is irrelevant because the average number of bureaucratic procedures among 145 countries from our analysis does not exceed six, while the average number of days for dealing with bureaucracy is about fifty. We also found a strong and positive impact of the absence of corruption on the efficiency of government spending, especially in countries with slow bureaucracy. For example, according to our analysis, if the level of corruption in Ukraine was like in Poland, then the Ukrainian government could distribute public revenue as efficiently as Finland's government, which is 16th among 145 countries in terms of spending efficiency, did.</p>

<P align="justify">Overall, neither the number of bureaucratic procedures nor their duration makes an economically significant difference in the efficiency of government spending. The first government priority should be the fight against corruption if it wants to increase the efficiency of public spending. However, decreasing the number and duration of bureaucratic procedures may catalyze the fight against corruption. In particular, it may be achieved by digitalizing and automatizing the procedures where it is possible, and hence by decreasing the involvement of a human factor in the process of government finances allocation.</p>

<h4>References</h4>

Karpenko, Anastasiia. <a href="https://kse.ua/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/Final_thesis_Karpenko_08.08.22.pdf">“How does the duration of bureaucratic procedures affect the efficiency of government spending“</a>. Master’s thesis. Kyiv School of Economics, 2022.

Moynihan, D., P. Herd, and H. Harvey. 2015. “Administrative Burden: Learning, Psychological, and Compliance Costs in Citizen-State Interactions.” Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 25, no. 1 (January): 43–69.

Rose-Ackerman, S. 1997. “The political economy of corruption.” in Corruption and the global economy, edited by Kimberly Ann Elliott, 31-60. United States: Institute for International Economics

Scott, P.G., and S.K., Pandey. 2015. “The influence of red tape on bureaucratic behavior: An experimental simulation.”  Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 19, no. 4 (April): 615–633. 

Звіт про огляд витрат державного бюджету у сфері поводження з радіоактивними відходами ядерного та неядерного циклу. https://mepr.gov.ua/files/docs/budget/Звіт_Вектор.pdf 

<p id="section1">[1] The author of this article participated as an intern in the analysis of the project “Vector” costs conducted by the Center of Public Finance and Governance at Kyiv School of Economics.</p>
